[narrator] In his quest
to map the cavern system,
Duane recruits physicist,
Stephen Leaah and his team
to scan the ranch
using new technology
called quantum imaging.
We did two analysis.
Duane, what you're staring at
is the Doppler shift.
[narrator] The scans reveal
a mysterious anomaly
near the Energy Zone.
[Stephen] I've only
ever seen that
in supermassive black holes.
[narrator] And beneath it,
an unusual
keyhole shaped chamber.
[Stephen] That's a series
of resonances
that we've seen before
inside known tunnels.
It's gotta be a cave,
that's what it is.
It looks like a cave to me.
That circle under
the Energy Zone
looks man made, no doubt.
[narrator] Searching
the area for a way
into the keyhole formation.
Come on, James,
find that tunnel.
[narrator] James discovers
a possible vent shaft
directly over top of it.
-You found something?
-[James] Yeah.
There's been a hole
there before, right here.
There is a cavern right below
where this shaft is.
I don't think it's natural,
I think this was man-made.
[narrator] And to gain access,
the team blasts 15 feet
of hardpack dirt
covering the vent.
Three, two, one,
fire in the hole!
-[explosion]
-[James exclaims, laughs]
[narrator] But the blast seems
to have triggered a flood...
-Oh, man.
-[Chad] Damn.
That's a lot of water.
Did we crack open
an underground river
or something?
More like
an underground tsunami.
[narrator] ...threatening
efforts to dig in the area.
Whatever it is,
it's pouring water
in every hole
we have out here.
We have no dry access
anywhere in sight.
[thunderclap]
[narrator] Blind Frog Ranch
stretches over 160 acres.
A remote and rugged area
in northeastern Utah.
It's a place
shrouded in legends
of ancient civilizations...
[Chad] Oh, wow, look at that.
This has to be
hundreds of years back.
[narrator] ...and
mysterious phenomenon.
[Duane] There's some
kind of dark force.
We got something
really weird here.
I've never seen
anything like that.
[narrator] Duane Ollinger
has owned a Blind Frog Ranch
for over a decade.
Convinced that the land
holds secrets...
[Duane] What the [bleep]
[narrator] ...and a massive
cache of Aztec gold
hidden underground.
We are sitting on some huge.
[narrator] Rumored to be
worth more than
three billion dollars.
Your ranch is part of the most
famous treasure hunt
that's never been solved.
[narrator] But every time
he's gotten close...
[Duane] [bleep] Look at that.
[narrator] ...the land
fights back.
What would eat
the head off of it?
[engine revving]
[exclaims] Ooh! Ah!
It's blinking red.
Poison gas.
Let's get out! Go!
[bleep] Go!
[theme music swells, fades]
[Chad] So, here's what
we drilled right there
and it flooded.
That blast knocked
something loose down
in that pond over there.
[James] Every hole around here
is filling up with water.
We had to put a pin in this
until this water drains
and we have to go
somewhere else.
We got to look at it
kind of like an excavation,
just as if we were
at an ancient site
where we're working
at multiple locations
all at one time.
Not everything
can be done at once,
at one spot.
We move on to the next.
I think the team
is disappointed
that we can't keep digging
at the vent shaft,
but when you're excavating
at an archaeological site,
you never know
what you're gonna run into.
You have to be flexible.
Sometimes you may start out
with one thing in mind
and have to do a complete 180.
You have to follow
where the site leads you,
not the other way around.
Do we have another location
that's ready to go?
[Duane] So, here's
the vent shaft.
We can't dig that all out,
it's all flooded.
But what about digging
on the other side?
That could dam sure
be an entry point
right over there.
That's the front door of this
key shaped cavern system
that quantum showed us.
-[Duane] and that's where
we found the Indian beads.
-Hm.
What Indian beads?
We found Indian beads
from hundreds of years old
and for some reason,
people are always
attracted to go there.
Bead site has always been
a special place.
People just seem to be
drawn to it, we are.
Let's be respectful.
Because that's a sacred place.
[narrator] With
the Energy Zone flooded,
the team is considering moving
to a site near the tail
of the keyhole cavern,
which is higher in elevation
and known as the bead site.
For centuries,
it has drawn visitors
who often leave small tokens
and offerings behind.
It's also where Duane and Chad
have found what they believe
are indigenous beads.
Down at the bead site,
we've been finding these beads
for years and years.
We've seen hundreds of them.
That's why we call it
the bead site.
[James] This
sounds intriguing.
There's a very good chance
that that could be
an access point.
But it's worth a shot.
I think we should
check it out.
-[James] All right, let's go.
-Let's get to work.
It's right up here.
Those Indian beads,
we don't know exactly
how they got here,
but this whole thing
is full of 'em right here.
And the deeper you go,
the more you find.
[James] What other
kind of stuff are you guys
finding up here?
So, this is strange,
people sneak on this property
and they come right here
and they leave offerings
and the whole nine yards,
it is still going on
to this day.
I come up about
once a week up here,
there's coins, there's beads,
necklaces, rings,
there's all kinds of stuff
in there.
And it looks like
everything's left in place.
Yeah, it's like
they're compelled
to leave something here
just to be here.
[James] It's
really interesting.
We have what appears to be
a rock shelter
facing south,
so during the winter,
this would have been
a lot warmer.
Look at the amount
of charcoal,
the burn marks that are here.
And you can see,
this is our normal dirt
right here.
This is the regular color.
And then, this is spread out
everywhere out here.
So, how many years
would it take to get
this much charcoal
all the way out there,
You're talking about
a long period of occupation
by not just one group,
by multiple groups.
I'm looking at this structure,
the more I see it,
the more I see the burn marks.
Even over there, like, events,
just these little holes
where smoke goes up.
This was being used
for living quarters
more than likely.
When you look around
at the bead site,
there's simply no way
to produce that much soot.
except for lighting
and shoveling out fires
over and over again
for thousands of years.
Interestingly,
there are soot marks
above several
of the vent holes
in the rock face.
These were from fires
that were lit somewhere
inside this formation.
Both of these
are hard evidence
that people were
at this location
for a very long time.
So, we're talking about
going back thousands of years,
not just a couple
of hundred years.
So, this site's
extremely important, Duane.
Something is going on
that's drawing people
for thousands
of fricking years
to come to this whole area.
And this is one place
we haven't got to explore in.
[James] I think we need
to excavate here.
We might very well
find a cave entrance.
I think we start excavating
little by little,
documenting, like,
stratigraphic layers.
I also want to catalog
and label artifacts
and all that.
That way, we respect the area.
I'm willing to go
get the excavator.
Once I get that dugout,
then you guys can start doing
what you do.
[James] While we're
waiting for Duane to get
the excavation gear up here,
I want to see
if we can authenticate
these Native American beads.
If they're genuine,
then that tells us
that Native American tribes
were living here.
The question is why
were they protecting
the shelter?
Is this spot actually
a filled-in entrance
to the caverns below?
[Duane] Come on,
let's go get that tackled.
[Chad] I'll see what we can
find out about these beads.
We brought an expert,
Dr. Morton out
to try to authenticate
the beads we found
at the bead site.
[Bob] My name
is Dr. Bob Morton.
I'm a material scientist
and X ray specialist.
So, I use a lot
of X ray technology
and analyze materials
to help try to understand
where they came from,
who was using them
and what period
did it come from?
Hey, there's the gang.
Yeah, I got James right there
-and Charlie.
-I've never met James before.
Bob, James Keenan.
-James Keenan.
-Yep, yep. Come on in.
[Duane] Come on in.
I looked at all the samples
that you guys sent me.
Very interesting results.
And I'm here to present
the findings.
I think you're gonna
be surprised.
We looked at the beads.
[Chad] What do you think?
But these beads
are unbelievably small.
And if you look at them
very carefully,
they're drawn in handmade.
It's glass with a trace
of gold in there.
-Really?
-[Bob] Oh, yeah, yeah.
And there's a variation
in the size of the holes.
So, this is manufactured
with a machine.
They're pretty old.
This was high-tech
-Amazing.
-Wow.
This is a big, big,
big discovery.
Dr. Morton analyzed
all of the beads.
It turns out that not only
are these beads genuine,
but they could be potentially
hundreds of years old.
They're trade beads.
They go by various names.
Hudson Bay beads, seed beads,
Venetian beads.
The Spaniards
brought the trade beads
many, many centuries ago.
When the Native Americans
saw these,
they wanted them.
[narrator] Originally produced
on the Venetian island
of Murano,
these beads were traded
by Venetians,
and then brought
to the New World
by the Spanish.
There they were highly prized
by Native Americans
for their color
and were used as currency
throughout North
and South America.
This was like,
better than gold
for the Native Americans.
So, they would value
these colors over gold.
-Yeah.
What they wore was highly
important to them.
Not only did it show status,
but it also gave them
the ability
to trade for other items
from far off.
It all proves the point,
that was their goal back then.
Why would they not put it
by their valuable stuff.
Or where they stayed
or their cave entrance
or whatever.
Which just leads,
we keep going down,
we need to dig that out.
We have a good spot
over there.
-Very, yeah, absolutely.
-Agreed.
Who knows what other artifacts
we can find the deeper we go.
We definitely
appreciate your time
coming all the way out here.
Oh, this is no problem.
-I appreciate it.
-All right, thanks, Bob.
[narrator] To determine
if the bead site
might be an entrance
to the keyhole formation,
Duane will first carefully
remove approximately
800 cubic feet of dirt
from the area.
While James, Chad and Charlie
examine the soil
for artifacts.
Right now, I think
the best thing that we can do
is pull everything out,
separate it into mounds
and piles.
Charles is hitting it
for metal,
but then, we'll start
sifting through it.
We'll look
for smaller artifacts.
[digital beeps]
[Charlie] So much metal
in the ground here.
Charlie, the whole [bleep]
excavator is metal, brother.
[digital beeps]
-I know that.
-[both laugh]
[Chad] Head of security.
He found the excavator.
That was a close one.
[digital beeps]
[Chad] Look how dark
that soil is, man.
[bleep]
It's like, virgin soil.
Oh, wow.
[digital beeps]
Look at that scraper.
Look at that.
Look at those edges.
-No way,
that's sharp as [bleep]
-[James] That's like--
This was Native American.
Scrapers were used
for both butchering meat
and for straightening out
projectile points.
It really could be
from any number of tribes.
But based on the fact
that we're mining it
from the same stratum
of these 500 year old beads,
my guess is that
it's some type
of Uto-Aztecan tribe,
like the Shoshone,
that have been here
in the area for the last
And I mean,
you're talking about
being under
four to six feet of dirt.
So, hopefully, as we keep
going deeper and deeper,
we're just gonna start finding
older artifacts and material.
Nice. That's serious, man.
It's going great,
we're finding old artifacts,
it's a good sign.
We seem to be following
a trail of human artifacts
as we go down
deeper and deeper.
We're not even going
that deep yet,
so if we even go deeper,
there's no telling
what's down there.
Hopefully, this will lead us
to the tunnel entrance.
Well, how'd you find
that little thing?
[James] It was on top.
[Chad] Look at this.
Is that bone?
[digital beeps]
Holy! Hey, look at this!
Check this [bleep] out.
Holy [bleep]
Holy! Hey, look at this!
Check this [bleep] out.
[narrator] Duane and the team
are excavating an area
of the ranch
known as the bead site,
which sits
just above the tail end
of the keyhole formation.
-Is that bone?
-[Chad] Yeah.
It's like a...
It's like a hip bone
or something.
[James] A hip bone, yeah.
Makes you wonder.
Huh, what do you
think of this?
That's gotta be a hip of,
like, a cow or a deer, maybe.
[James] There are some
cuts into here.
You can tell there's been
a cut right here.
This looks like the deepest
with a pretty sharp scraper.
If you look into
the petroglyphs,
there is...
appear to be a lot of bones
turned into face masks.
And it would have been,
I mean, it could have
been like this.
Oh [bleep] Look at that.
-That's badass!
-[Charlie] Yeah.
-[whoops]
-[Charlie] Cleaned up.
[James] They could have
repurposed that
into some type of headgear.
A lot of Native Americans
and Mesoamerican cultures
were known to use
the ceremonial masks
in their rituals.
And masks made from bone
or even complete skulls
had been found
at Templo Mayor,
which was the Aztec capital
of Tenochtitlan, now,
presently Mexico City.
You know, they would have been
up here, obviously,
this broke off.
But they would have had...
they could have had feathers
or anything else
added to the top.
Deer skin.
I mean, that's exciting.
That's an amazing find
if that's what it is.
Obviously, we have to look
into it more, clean it up.
But yeah, it's this huge
time capsule underground.
And it's getting
better and better
the further and further
down we go.
That's a great find.
I'll go put that over
with the others.
[narrator] Duane has moved
close to 800 cubic feet
of earth
from the mouth
of the bead site.
But at this point,
the excavator is unable
to reach any further
without possibly
damaging the rock.
[Chad] You're gonna hit
that overhang.
[digital beeps]
I think so.
That's as far as we can...
[narrator] With the angle
of the rock overhang,
the track hoe can't safely
dig any further
into the possible cave mouth
at the shelter.
To break apart the remaining
soil and sedimentary rock
will require
a horizontal drill.
In the meantime,
the team will continue
to excavate by hand.
[Chad] So, we're done
digging for the day
with the track hoe,
so we don't scrape the wall
and mess it up
'cause there
could be petroglyphs
or who knows,
an opening around here.
So, we just
wanna be real careful
with the integrity
of this whole cave.
Oh, it's another...
James, look at this.
[James] Now, that was used
for grinding.
-[Chad] It's flat.
-[James] Yep, yes.
That's exactly what
that was used for.
That's a grinding stone.
You can see
where it was worked.
Chad has found
another really cool artifact.
It's seven feet,
which is the same stratum
as that bone mask.
This is a grinding stone.
It's known as a metate.
It was used to grind corn
which they call maize for tens
of thousands of years.
-Yeah, I know,
these are good finds.
-Yeah.
[James] Yeah,
we'll definitely,
we'll clean them up.
[Chad] Hold up.
Antiquities are showing us
and hopefully, how they got
in and out of the cavern.
This could be the entrance
to the cave.
So, we're just gonna go
through each one
of these piles
and see what all we can find.
[digital beeps]
Right there.
Still there.
[metal clanks]
It's got rock stacked in it.
I will lose my hip,
whatever that was.
I suspect
it's probably modern.
No.
What the hell is this?
Is that a quarter?
Hey, guys, y'all gotta
come look at this.
[Chad] Huh?
[Charlie] Come here and look
and see what I just found.
[Chad] He found something?
Spanish is what
this is right here.
What did you find?
[Charlie] It's a coin.
A Spanish coin.
I'll be damned.
Where did you find it?
I was digging in this hole
right here, found it.
Look at that [bleep] 1784.
No [bleep] Look at that.
[James] Looks like
silver from here.
[Duane] What did it
ring up as?
-[Charlie] Oh,
on the metal detector?
-[Duane] Yeah.
[Charlie] I found it
right up in here.
It was pretty exciting
to find that
a Spanish coin from the 1700s.
And, you know, is this
the beginning of our finding
the cache of treasure up here?
All we can do
is just keep digging.
[Duane] Hell of a find,
Charlie boy.
Yeah, hell,
that gives you a little hope.
[James] The Spanish coin
allows us to know that
there were people here
that had it
in their possession.
And we're talking about a coin
from the late 1700s.
The only way there would be
a Spanish coin here
in the Uinta Basin
is if it was brought
from what's now Mexico.
[narrator] For hundreds
of years after the Aztecs
fled from Mexico to Utah
with Montezuma's gold,
the Spanish Conquistadors
dispatched armies
to search for the treasure.
This coin could be evidence
that they searched
in this area.
[Chad] Having found one,
there's got to be more
than that.
Let's keep looking.
[Chad grunts]
[digital beeps]
[James] I wanna grab some
of that dirt from up there
and I'll sift through it.
-[Duane] Take it now.
-[James] Okay.
I'm gonna take some of that.
This is... right over here.
[digital beeps]
[Duane] Hell yeah.
[James] This is from
that back area.
Look. Hey, guys, look, look.
-[Chad] You found another one?
-[James] Yeah.
Another coin?
[James] Another coin.
This one is in really
bad shape.
-[Duane] It's all bent.
-[James] Look at that.
The only thing
I can read is...
1782, I think.
That's a hell of a find.
I mean, it's over
Now, let's keep digging,
find some more [bleep]
[James] All right, keep going
and grabbing more
of that dirt.
I mean, there's no telling
what's in here.
If we find the cavern, man,
it could lead
to this buried treasure
that we're looking for.
[narrator] Coming up...
[Chad] Hey, guys,
we're ready to drill?
This is it.
[Charlie] Drill, baby, drill.
[bleep] hold on, boy.
[engine accelerating]
[Chad] Hey, guys,
we're ready to drill?
[narrator] Unable to reach
any further into the mouth
of the bead site
without potentially damaging
the rock overhang,
the team has decided
to swap out the excavator
for another piece
of heavy equipment.
A horizontal drill.
[Chad] Here we go,
this is it.
Today is the day.
So, we had this... [grunts]
horizontal drill
that I haven't ran in a while.
But I think we're gonna
have to see if we can
figure it out real quick.
But kind of like
riding a bike, I guess.
I gotta get used
to this thing again.
[narrator] The horizontal
drill can extend hundreds
of feet,
reaching much further
and with more precision
than the excavator.
Using a blast of water
and rotating teeth,
it can easily loosen
the hardpack soil
and tunnel a path
to the cavern mouth.
It's been a few years
since I have jumped on these.
[beeping]
[Duane] Whenever they don't
send the operator
with a piece of equipment,
that is gonna be a challenge.
It always has
and always will be.
One thing about it when Chad
gets on something like this,
he'll figure it out.
He's always been pretty
mechanically inclined.
You know, I haven't drove
one of these in a few years,
so they're real technical,
there's a lot of buttons
and they're all
a little different.
And a lot of the labels
on the buttons
are all worn out.
You can't see what it is.
I mean, even like,
switch a piece of pipe out,
it's like four buttons,
so you have to do one thing
after another after another
and we're paying by the hour.
So, this is... It's [bleep]
[engine starts]
[Chad] Nice.
Okay, I got it now.
So, I got the drill in place.
All we have to do now
is hook up the waterline
from the tanker to the drill.
[Duane] Yeah, the biggest
problem is,
really, it's not
your equipment.
So, whoever is gonna bring
whatever you need out here,
you just don't know
if they're gonna bring you
the right stuff.
And apparently,
we got some hoses
that we have to play
with right here.
Attaboy.
I think we got
a male to male there.
Charlie boy,
they gave us two...
-two male ends.
-[Charlie] Yeah.
What the [bleep]
Oh [bleep]
So, we have a connector hose
right here.
We got a female,
and then, a male here,
and the attachment here
is a male,
so there's two males
that don't hook up.
It doesn't make babies.
There's a hose
in the storage building.
I'll go over
and look at it and see.
Okay, we need
a female to female.
Yes, sir, two inches.
[Duane] This is not good.
[Charlie] I brought up
what I had in the shop.
So, if I...
If I could make
any of it work,
then, hell, somehow,
we'll just rig it where we
get water in it.
Here it goes.
-[grunts] Okay.
-There we go.
Well, see what we got.
When they sent the drill out
and the water truck,
they didn't give us
a female to female coupler.
So, we looked around the ranch
and actually found one.
So, we got it set up.
We now have to move the drill
and the water truck
and they hopefully
start drilling.
We're gonna center drill
right in the path
where we're finding
all these artifacts.
We know from the soot deposits
that people were inside
this rock formation.
So, hopefully,
this trail of artifacts
is pointing us right into
the cavern entrance.
[Duane whistles] Hold!
[Duane whistles]
[Chad] Oh [bleep]
It's good!
Perfect.
-Go back her in it.
-[Chad] All right.
[Duane] We'll hook
the water lines up,
it'd be good.
I'm gonna try to get
the truck a lot closer.
We only have so longer hose.
So, I'm gonna ram it back
and see how close we can get
without getting stuck.
Here we go.
[Charlie] Behind.
[Chad] This [bleep] is heavy.
[Duane] Yeah, yeah,
you got a good run at it.
[Chad] So, my concern
with the water truck
is this soil is so loose
and your tires can just spin.
Plus, we're carrying
a [bleep] load of water,
it's just heavy on it.
So, we're gonna
get a run at it,
and maybe we'll get close.
[Charlie] All right,
he's gonna be coming hard now.
Yo!
[Duane] A little bit
more, son.
Come on! Give her hell.
Charlie boy!
He's gonna give her hell.
Get out of the way,
he might not control it.
[engine revving]
-[Chad] Hey, we're clear?
-[Duane] Come on!
-[Chad] All right?
-[Duane] Yeah!
You better [bleep]
hold on, boy.
[horns honking]
[Duane] Give her hell!
-[engine revving]
-[Duane] Come on back!
Come on!
[engine revving]
[Duane] Give her hell!
-[engine revving]
-[Duane] Come on back!
Come on!
Hell yeah! Hell yeah!
What do you think?
Perfect.
[narrator] With the drill
and water tank in place,
the team can begin
to bore through the dirt
at the mouth of the bead site.
All right, no leaks.
Let's drill, huh?
Yeah, yeah. Fire it up.
[beeping]
[engine starts]
[Chad] Oh, we're good.
[exclaims] Yeah!
It's working!
Hell yeah.
Feel that,
it's, like, crunching.
I mean, it's like a crunching.
It's not like a dirt.
It's grinding, it's like a...
-[Charlie] I can hear it
crunching in there.
-[Chad] Really?
Every time it does that,
evaporates the ground
around it.
Yeah.
[Chad] Hey!
[Charlie] Hold
that for a second,
let's see where it's up.
It's another one
of those beads.
[Chad] Really?
-[Chad] We are on
the right track.
-[Charlie] Yeah.
What are you...
You're 30 feet in?
Yeah.
This probably came out
at around 25 feet.
-[Chad] Really?
-[Charlie] Yeah.
[machine whirring]
Keeps changing color,
the water.
[Chad] Really?
That's good!
Probably going through
some different layers of soil.
How the [bleep]
we'll get in the cave, then?
-[Charlie] Drill, baby, drill.
-[Chad] Yeah, hell yeah.
[narrator] A sudden
lack of friction
means that the bid
has entered a void
and water has stopped
flowing from the borehole
because it's pouring
into the void instead.
[Charlie] That's a very
good sign, right there.
We're damn sure in the void.
Well, that's good news.
[dramatic music playing]
What the [bleep]
[Chad exclaims] Ah!
So, right now...
we're in a void,
and we're pumping
water in there,
but for some reason,
the water is coming
right back out.
[Charlie] You can see
when he turns the water on,
it shoots out.
[narrator] Water has started
pouring back out
of the borehole,
indicating that the void
the team has reached
is quite small.
If it was a larger cavern,
the team could
expect the water to pour
continuously into the hole
rather than quickly
spinning back out.
[Chad] [bleep]
And it looks like
you're almost underwater,
-all the way back track.
-[Chad] Yeah.
Yeah, we're flooding here.
[Charlie] Yeah.
[machine whirring]
It's hitting something
'cause it's bouncing.
Yeah.
We could be against a cavern,
it's getting stuck.
[narrator] While the drill
easily passed through
30 feet of dirt
and a small void,
it suddenly has ground
to a halt.
The most likely explanation
is that the rock wall
above the bead site
extends deeper into the ground
than they thought.
God, hear that water
just draining down.
It's been hours
and I'm not getting anywhere.
Like, this is a dead end.
[Charlie] That didn't take
probably three to five minutes
for that void to fill up
before that water
started coming back out,
-so it's a small void.
-Yeah.
That could be at the bottom
of the void.
Yeah, could be
or that could be a seam
that leaves us
to a bigger cavern.
I don't think so
because where the drill bit
hit the back of the void,
it just stopped dead.
It just kept grinding
against the limestone,
but it wouldn't go anywhere.
There's no entrance there.
I think that rock wall
that you hit,
I think it just goes
straight down.
You know, we can see
the smoke vents
on the outside.
They got to connect
with something in there.
I know, it's got to be
something big enough
for people to get in
to start a fire.
But that shelter
is not the way in.
We know that the keyhole
cavern passes under here,
but not how far down
under it goes.
Who knows how far
that smoke traveled up
to leave those soot marks.
Even this side of the cavern
is pretty wide.
It could be 100 foot
across there.
So, that entrance could be
anywhere above that.
And there's a ton of cracks
and holes above this formation
that we've never
really even looked at.
[narrator] The narrow end
of the keyhole cavern
is around 100 feet wide.
Despite drilling
into a dead end
at the shelter area,
there are still thousands
of square feet
of the bead site
where an entrance
could be hidden.
Well, not
the magnetometer, James,
'cause it helped us
find the void
underneath that dig site.
It's possible, so I think
we should definitely try it.
I'm gonna grab
my metal detector
and I'll go up there
and see what else I can find.
So, we can crawl over
that whole area
and start seeing
if there's any cracks
and formations
that might show
at the entry point.
-We'll see that.
-[James] Let's do it.
[Duane] So, how are we
doing this?
I'm gonna use
the magnetometer.
What it's gonna tell us
is if there's any type of void
below ground.
[Duane] All right.
Our objective is to find
that underground entrance.
Yeah, good stuff.
[digital beeps]
If we find the void,
we're digging.
[James] I'm gonna methodically
look through the bead site
where we dug for any voids.
But I'm also gonna
spot check any areas
that visibly look like
a possible filled in entrance
on the rock formation.
We have to be careful
how and where we scan
because uneven ground
could cause false positives.
[narrator] The team needs
to cover 16,000 square feet
of area
where the bead site formation
sits over the tail end
of the keyhole cavern.
They're searching
for any anomaly
that might indicate
a hidden entrance
into the cavern below.
[beeping]
Chad, do you want me
to hit this top to bottom?
-Whatever you think, man.
-Okay.
Just find that [bleep] hole
for all I care about.
[Charlie] They're all on that
side looking for an opening
and I'm gonna spend
my time right here.
I felt for 14 years
this is the entrance.
You're looking
at ancient times here.
And you know, I think it takes
someone that's older,
slower and wiser
to listen to this mountain.
[beeping intensifies]
Yeah, let's see
what we got here.
It's a modern ring.
It was left here.
[Chad] It's like, you just
need to carry that behind you
all day, you know?
[laughs] Right.
Just drive me around
on the back of the ATV.
[Chad] Hang it off
your backpack.
[Charlie] How long,
just one second.
Look here.
Hey, guys, you gotta
come check this out.
Hey!
[Chad] What do you got?
That's a cross.
[bleep] And it's got
patina on it,
it's been there
for a very long time.
But that's definitely a cross.
It's sitting right here.
Like, it was marking a spot.
[Chad] But what spot
is it marking?
Damn sure it looks like
a cross right here
in front of it.
Good job, Charlie boy.
Usually, when you see a stone
with a carved cross like this,
it's a religious symbol
or a trail marker.
But the Native Americans
and the Mormons that were
here in the area,
they didn't use a cross
as a religious symbol at all.
That makes me think
that this is definitely
a trail marker for something.
The cross that Charlie found
has to be marking something,
but what?
It could have
tumbled down the hill
or could have been moved here.
We just have
to keep searching.
[beeping]
[Charlie] I think we need
to focus right here
for a while.
-[Duane] Son.
-[Chad] What?
[Duane] Look at that
rock right there.
What's behind that rock?
Right in front of you.
Well, it's like,
it's covered up.
Look behind that deal.
[Chad] Oh!
It almost looks like,
they're just shoved in there,
doesn't it?
To, like, hide it.
[James] That does
look a bit odd.
But it's worth checking out
to see if it keeps going back
into the hillside.
You've seen this before?
[Duane] Never, never.
New one here.
[Chad] Look out below.
Watch out, James.
Sorry.
[Chad] It just doesn't
look natural.
Looks like it was placed here
on purpose.
[James] Can you
get in there more?
[Chad grunts] Rock! Jesus.
I can see, like, ten foot,
and then it looks like
a wall on the back,
but it goes down deeper.
[James] Look at that.
Look out.
[Duane] This is something.
Let's get in there
and see what we got here.
[James] I think you're just
gonna have to crawl in.
[Chad] Look out.
Don't take
any unnecessary chances.
A collapse is a pretty big
possibility right now.
It will be a son of a bitch
to get you out of there
if any of that collapses.
We'll just start pulling
it all loose throughout.
We'll keep pulling it out,
and that will give you
more space.
From what I can see here,
it looks like
it goes further back.
[digital beeps]
[Chad] Metal detector
on my belt keeps beeping.
I heard it go off twice.
-[digital beeps]
-[Chad] Maybe its batteries
are loose or something.
[people coughing
in the background]
[digital beeps]
[bleep]
Hey, look at this.
-[digital beeps]
-[Chad] Look at this.
-[Duane] What?
-This is going off,
this is metal.
That's gotta be a lot.
A gold little--
This looks like
a slag ingot bar.
It is pretty fricking heavy.
I mean...
[Chad] There might be
more in here.
[digital beeps]
[Chad] Oh, it's still
going off, man.
From the weight
and the way it looks,
I think it's a low purity
gold bar.
[dramatic music swells]
Holy [bleep] dude!
Finally, I get to hold [bleep]
gold in my hand.
[James] Look at that, Duane.
[bleep]
[laughs]
[dramatic music fades]